
Project Report

Weather Prediction Model (Rainfall From Temperature)
Submitted by: Gagan Tyagi – 25BCY10010

Introduction

I always wondered how weather apps predict if it will rain or not. So for this project, I tried making a very simple prediction system myself. I used past weather data of Lucknow (1990–2022) and trained a small machine learning model that tries to guess rainfall just by looking at the temperature.

It’s not a perfect or professional system, but it helped me learn how data and ML are used in real life, instead of just theory.


Aim of the Project

My main goal was to:

Learn how to clean and use a dataset

Understand how Linear Regression works

Try a basic prediction using machine learning

Make a small interface so anybody can test the model

See how accurate or inaccurate predictions can be


Tools and Stuff Used

I used Python as the main language and some libraries:

pandas & numpy for handling data

scikit-learn for the model

streamlit to make a webpage-like interface

A CSV file containing weather records


How I Made It Work

The steps I followed:

1. Read the weather CSV file using pandas


2. Some values were missing in the dataset, so I replaced them with average values


3. Divided the data into two parts – one for training and one for testing


4. Used Linear Regression to train the model


5. Asked the user for a temperature


6. The model returns a rainfall amount (in mm)





What Results I Got

When a user gives some temperature (like 28°C), the model prints how much rainfall might happen.
It isn’t totally accurate because rain depends on lots of factors that I didn’t include.
But still, it gives a rough prediction — which was the main purpose of this beginner project.

Where It Can Be Useful

This idea can be useful for:

Early hints for farmers

Weather prediction demos

Showing relation between climate factors



What I Can Improve Later

If I continue working on this, I would like to:

Add more weather details like humidity, wind, pressure

Try a better machine learning model instead of only Linear Regression

Add graphs so results look better

Host it online so others can try it too



---

Conclusion

This project was a good learning experience for me.
Before doing this, I only knew about machine learning from videos or notes.
But now I understand the actual steps behind training a model and predicting something.

It’s a very simple project, but I feel it’s a good start.


References

Class notes

Internet tutorials for pandas/scikit-learn

Streamlit documentation

Dataset from public weather record
